Support for Pushing data (#332)
codatio/codat-docs: docs/using-the-api/push.md

---
title: "Creating and updating data"
description: "Understand how to create and update data in Codat's integrated platforms"
---
import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

:::note Data coverage

View the full details of Codat's support for creating and updating data for each accounting platform in our <a class="external" href="https://knowledge.codat.io/supported-features/accounting" target="_blank">Data Coverage Explorer</a>.

:::

A core feature that Codat offers is the ability to create and update records in the underlying integrations using a single data model. 

We support the following operations to push the data: 

- Create a new record using the `POST` method,

> - Update an existing record using the `PUT` method.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Update an existing record using the `PUT` method.  
- Delete an existing record using the `DELETE` method.
```

> 

Reviewer: We need to add how CRD operations work in Codat. Introduce the sequence diagram and explain it.

Reviewer: This then provides context on the options endpoint

> ## Understand your options

Reviewer: Something Understanding an integrations create/update requirements
```suggestion
## Use a valid model
```

> First, you need to know how the data needs to be inserted into the source platform. This includes not only names or amounts, but also details that may be handled differently across different accounting packages. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each integration has different requires in order for create and update methods to be valid. You can access the integration specific model requirements using Codat's model endpoints. In general, these provide static data such as whether the property is required, however, in some cases such as ERP systems, they offer greater customization and therefore the model endpoint provides data specific to the SMBs setup. This includes not only names or amounts, but also details that may be handled differently across different accounting packages. 
```

Use our [Options](https://docs.codat.io/codat-api#/operations/get-companies-companyId-connections-connectionId-push) endpoint to understand integration-specific requirements and view example responses:

```sh

> GET https://api.codat.io/companies/{companyId}/connections/{connectionId}/options/{dataType}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
GET https://api.codat.io/companies/{companyId}/connections/{connectionId}/options/invoices
```

          {
            "field": "NominalCode",
            "details": "Max length of 10 characters."
          }
        ],
        "information": []
      }
    },
    "name": {
      "type": "String",
      "displayName": "Name",
      "description": "Name of account as it appears in the chart of accounts or general ledger.",
      "required": true,
      "validation": {
        "warnings": [],
        "information": [
          {
            "field": "Name",
            "details": "Payments are enabled to this account if the name ends in .PaymentsEnabled."
          }
        ]
      }
    },
    "description": {
      "type": "String",
      "displayName": "Description",
      "description": "Description for the nominal account.",
      "required": false
    },
    "fullyQualifiedCategory": {
      "type": "String",
      "displayName": "Fully Qualified Category",
      "description": "Account type and category for nominal account.",
      "options": [
        {
          "value": "Asset.Current",
          "type": "String",
          "displayName": "Current Asset",
          "required": false
        },
      ],
      "required": true
    }
  },
  "required": true

> }

Reviewer: Reduce amount of json

:::

Use the `POST /companies/{companyId}/connections/{connectionId}/push/{dataType}` endpoint to create a record in the target platform. The request body should be a JSON object which conforms to the structure of the [Options endpoint response](/using-the-api/push#understand-your-options) we explored previously. 

You can also review our data model schemas (for example, the [Accounts](/accounting-api#/schemas/Account) data type) to check the full scope of fields returned in the response. Note that we base our schemas on the `GET` request, which includes `modeifiedDate` and `sourceModifiedDate` that are not used when creating or updating a record. 

Try to create a new account via our [Create account](https://docs.codat.io/accounting-api#/operations/create-account) endpoint using a valid request body, or a request body that leads to a validation error:

<Tabs>
   <TabItem value="wo" label="Create an account">  

  ```json  
    {
      "nominalCode": "4200123456", 
      "name": "Codat Assets Account", 
      "fullyQualifiedCategory": "Asset.Current" 
    }
  ```
   </TabItem>

   <TabItem value="with" label="Create an account with an error">  

  ```json  
    {

>       "nominalCode": "350045006500", 

Reviewer: Add a comment after saying too many characters

---
title: "Create, update, and delete data"
description: "Understand how to add, modify, and delete data in Codat's integrated platforms"
---
import Tabs from "@theme/Tabs";
import TabItem from "@theme/TabItem";

:::note Data coverage

> View the full details of Codat's support for creating and updating data for each accounting platform in our <a class="external" href="https://knowledge.codat.io/supported-features/accounting" target="_blank">Data Coverage Explorer</a>.

Reviewer: Are we leaving delete out because we don't currently support this in knowledge UI?

:::

> A core feature that Codat offers is the ability to create, update, and delete records in the source platforms of our integrations using our standard data models. We support the following operations (also known as CUD): 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Codat offers the ability to create, update, and delete records in the source platforms of our integrations using our standard data models. We support the following operations (also known as CUD): 
```

> - Create a new record using the `POST` method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Create** a new record using the `POST` method.
```

- Update an existing record using the `PUT` method.

> - Delete an existing record using the `DELETE` method.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Delete** an existing record using the `DELETE` method.
```

> The CUD process first requires you to [check the data model](/using-the-api/push#use-a-valid-data-model) of the data type you want to create, update, or delete. This helps you ensure all required properties are included in your request. 

Author: might be a one tie activity, might be multiple

Next, you are ready to [perform the CUD operation](/using-the-api/push#perform-the-operation) using the relevant data model. You will receive a CUD operation key in return. You can then use it to [monitor the status of the operation](/using-the-api/push#monitor-the-status-of-your-operation), or display its results.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant app as Application 
    participant codat as Codat
    

>     app ->> codat: Get valid model for data type

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    app ->> codat: Get create/update {{dataType}} model
```

Reviewer 2: Also, the relevance of this step depends on the integration - most integrations, the model will not be changing

    codat -->> app: Valid data type model
    
    app ->> codat: Create, update, or delete record
    codat -->> app: CUD operation key

>     codat -->> app: CUD operation status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    codat -->> app: CUD operation status webhook
```

>     app ->> codat: Get CUD {{dataType}} model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    app ->> codat: Get create/update {{dataType}} model
```

    alt Status is successful
        app ->> codat: Get CUD operation
        codat -->> app: CUD operation
    end
``` 

### Synchronous vs asynchronous operations

> You should assume that all data creation and updates will be processed asynchronously when integrating with Codat. It may take a few seconds to a couple of minutes to complete the operation, depending on the underlying platform. This means you will receive a `Pending` status in response to your CUD request. You can [monitor the status of your request via a webhook](/using-the-api/push#monitor-the-status-of-your-operation) to verify when the operation completes. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Data creation and updates will be handled asynchronously, and will take between a few seconds to a couple of minutes to complete the operation, depending on the underlying platform. This means you will receive a `Pending` status in response to your CUD request. You can [monitor the status of your request via a webhook](/using-the-api/push#monitor-the-status-of-your-operation) to verify when the operation completes (preferred), or poll the status. 
```
```suggestion
You should assume that all data creation and updates will be processed asynchronously when integrating with Codat. It may take a few seconds to a couple of minutes to complete the operation, depending on the underlying platform. This means you will receive a `Pending` status in response to your CUD request. You can [monitor the status of your request via a webhook](/using-the-api/push#monitor-the-status-of-your-operation) to verify when the operation completes. 
```

Reviewer 2: Not sure why its showing multiple suggestions here

Reviewer: Should we add a note for offline connectors? For example,

If you are on the enterprise plan and have offline connectors enabled, these CUD requests can take up to XXX days to complete for we determine that the desktop application is unreachable and therefore unable to complete the request.

Author: @dcoplowe there is a section on timeouts for offline connectors later in the doc - is that not sufficient?

Reviewer: Yes, that's in the timeout section where we use offline connectors as an example. I think it's useful to add context specifically calling out offline connectors here too. I'd suggest we mention that a push operation can be in a `Pending` state indefinitely and in the timeouts section we explain how to control this behaviour.

> For the few integrations that perform these requests synchronously, the behavior remains the same. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Remove.

### Supplemental data

We have introduced [supplemental data](/using-the-api/supplemental-data/overview) to many of our data types, enabling you to enrich these data types with additional properties not included in Codat's out-of-the box data models. You can create, update, and delete supplemental data using the same process as outlined above.

## Use a valid data model

Each integration may have different requirements to the request body of a CUD operation. So, before triggering the operation, you need to know how the data should be inserted into the source platform. You can access the integration-specific model requirements using Codat's _Get model_ endpoints.

> In most cases, the models provide static data, such as detailing mandatory properties. Other integrations, like ERP systems, offer greater customization, so the models may also include details that are handled differently across different accounting packages.

Author: some platforms that we integrated

> In most cases, the models provide static data, such as detailing mandatory properties. Other integrations, like ERP systems, offer greater customization, so the models may also include details that are handled differently across different accounting packages.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In most cases, the models provide static data, such as detailing mandatory properties. Some platforms, like Netsuite, offer greater customization, so the models may also include details that are handled differently across different accounting packages.
```

:::info Deleting records

> Our data deletion endpoints, where available, simply require the record `id`, `companyId`, and `connectionId` to be included in the request body.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our data deletion endpoints, where available, simply require the record `id`, `companyId`, and `connectionId` to be included in the request url.
```

:::

> Let's use our [Get create account model](/accounting-api#/operations/get-create-chartOfAccounts-model) endpoint to view integration-specific requirements for creating or updating the `accounts` data type in Xero. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's use our [Get create account model](/accounting-api#/operations/get-create-chartOfAccounts-model) endpoint to view integration-specific requirements for creating the `accounts` data type in Xero. 
```

      "required": true,
      "validation": {
        "warnings": [],
        "information": [
          {
          ...
          }
        ]
      }
    },
    ...
    "fullyQualifiedCategory": {
      "type": "String",
      "displayName": "Fully Qualified Category",
      "description": "Account type and category for nominal account.",
      "options": [
        {
          "value": "Asset.Current",
          "type": "String",
          "displayName": "Current Asset",
          "required": false
        },
        ...
      ],
      "required": true
    }
  },
  "required": true
}
```

## Perform the operation

:::caution Properties not in the _Get model_ response
If you attempt to create or update a record using properties not documented in the  _Get model_ response, you may receive validation errors in response to your request.
:::

Let's try creating a new account using our [Create account](/accounting-api#/operations/create-account) endpoint. The request body should be a JSON object which conforms to the structure of the [Get create account model](/accounting-api#/operations/get-create-chartOfAccounts-model) we called previously. 

> Note that we base our models on the `GET` request, which includes `modifiedDate` and `sourceModifiedDate` that are not used when creating or updating a record. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note: we base our models on the `GET` request, which includes `modifiedDate` and `sourceModifiedDate` that are not used when creating or updating a record. 
```

> We base our models on the `GET` request, which includes `modifiedDate` and `sourceModifiedDate` that are not used when creating or updating a record. 

Reviewer: We should update our models so that we don't have to have sentences in our docs like this.

We will try to create an account using a valid request body, and a request body that leads to a validation error:

<Tabs>
   <TabItem value="wo" label="Create an account">  

  ```json  
    {
      "nominalCode": "4200123456", 
      "name": "Codat Assets Account", 
      "fullyQualifiedCategory": "Asset.Current" 
    }
  ```
   </TabItem>

   <TabItem value="with" label="Create an account with an error">  

  ```json  
    {
      "nominalCode": "350045006500", // Nominal code intentionally consits of too many characters
      "name": "Excessive Length Account", 
      "fullyQualifiedCategory": "Asset.Current" 
    }
  ```
   </TabItem>
</Tabs>

This results in a corresponding response from the endpoint, which includes the following details:

> - **pushOperationKey**: a unique identifier generated by Codat to represent this single create operation that can be used to track its status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **pushOperationKey**: a unique identifier generated by Codat to represent this single CUD operation that can be used to track its status
```

- **requestedOnUtc**: the datetime (in UTC) when the operation was requested 
- **completedOnUtc**: the datetime (in UTC) when the operaion was completed, null if `Pending`
- **validation**: a human-readable object that contains validation details, including errors, encountered during the operation
- **changes**: an array that communicates which record has changed (`recordRef` property) and the manner in which it changed (`type` property that can be `Unknown`, `Created`, `Modified`, or `Deleted`)

<Tabs>
   <TabItem value="wo" label="Account creation response">  

  ```json
    {
      "changes": [...],
      "data": {
        "id": "fdeaba98-6f74-4b03-9a67-3708ea442417",
        "nominalCode": "4200123456",
        "name": "Codat Assets Account",
        "fullyQualifiedCategory": "Asset.Current",
        "type": "Unknown",
        "status": "Unknown",
        "isBankAccount": false,

>         "modifiedDate": "2023-03-21T17:17:59.4604771Z",

Reviewer: Does this field exist in the create model?

Author: @dcoplowe  no, it doesn't. there is a note about that in this section, plus this is an example response to the push, and it does exist there.

In the **Monitor > Alerting rules > Create new rule** [view](https://app.codat.io/monitor/rules) of the Codat Portal, create a subscription to the _Push operation status has changed_ rule type. You can review detailed instructions in our documentation for [subscribing to rules](/introduction/webhooks/core-rules-create) and receiving webhooks as [email alerts](/introduction/webhooks/receive-webhooks-as-email).

You will receive the following response from the _Push operation status has changed_ webhook:

```json 
{
 "CompanyId":"fa115de8-5269-474e-8b63-fd697ec04b1b",
 "RuleId":"c40791fe-b6fd-45c3-9bf7-0a16abf1b8fd",
 "Type":"Push Operation Status Changed",
 "AlertId":"a62bfb38-d73c-4aab-9bb6-d8014bba5f29",
 "Message":"accounts triggered notification for PushOperationStatusChanged at 2019-05-22T18:19:42.742Z",
 "Data":{
    "dataType":"accounts",
    "status":"Success",
    "pushOperationKey":"8e42e5f6-c596-4ddf-a5e4-fdc9977f5a99"
 }
```

> You can also use our endpoints to monitor the status of your create, update, or delete operation. List all operations for a company using the [List push operations](/codat-api#/operations/get-company-push-history) endpoint, or list a single operation via the [Get push operation](/codat-api#/operations/get-push-operation).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use our endpoints to monitor the status of your create, update, or delete operation. List all operations for a company using the [List push operations](/codat-api#/operations/get-company-push-history) endpoint, or list a single operation via the [Get push operation](/codat-api#/operations/get-push-operation). This is endpoint is useful for when you want to include summary information to your customers outlining the status of their CUD history.
```

Finally, you can GET GET GET GET 

### Timeouts

It is possible for an operation to be in a `Pending` status indefinitely, for example, if a user's on-premise software is offline. Codat provides a timeout functionality for such scenarios. 

> If the `timeoutInMinutes` property has been set on a CUD operation, Codat guarantees that the operation will not be processed after that deadline. If the deadline expires, the status of the operation will change to `TimedOut`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to control the timeframe in which you want your CUD operation to complete you can use the `timeoutInMinutes` query parameter. If the deadline expires, the status of the operation will change to `TimedOut`.
```

## Pitfalls

> - When a CUD operation successfully completes, this changes the specific record in Codat's system, but does not change any *associated* records. For example, if you create a payment against an invoice, the payment becomes available in Codat once the operation completes, but the invoice may still show a non-zero `amountDue`. To view the fully updated associated records, you need to requeue all the relevant datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When a CUD operation successfully completes, this changes the specific record in Codat's system, but does not change any *associated* records. For example, if you create a payment against an invoice, the payment becomes available in Codat once the operation completes, but the invoice may still show a non-zero `amountDue`. To view the fully updated associated records, you need to [requeue all the relevant datasets](/using-the-api/queueing-data-syncs).
```
